201a: updated assignment 0 (#32)
jlpteaching/comparch: modules/gem5/_posts/2000-03-01-assignment1.md

You can find the definitions for the workload objects in gem5 under `workloads/workloads.py`.
In this assignment, we will only be using `MatMulWorkload`.
In order to create an object of `MatMulWorkload` you just need to pass matrix size (an integer) `mat_size` to its constructor (`__init__`) function.

**In your configuration choose an appropriate value for `mat_size`**. It should be large enough that it makes your workload interesting.
Since changing `mat_size` will influence simulation time, as a guideline, choose a value that results in simulation times less than 10 minutes (hostSeconds < 600).
We found that setting mat_size to 224 will result in a simulation time of around 5 minutes which is a reasonable compromise.

**CAVEAT [PLEASE READ CAREFULLY]**: When using this workload with gem5, your simulation will output two sets of statistics in the same `stats.txt` file. Each set of statistics start with a line like below.

```text
---------- Begin Simulation Statistics ----------
```

> Please make sure to **ignore** the **second** set of generated statistics in your analysis.

Reviewer: Can you explain why this is dropped? Did we fix the output somehow?

Author: I dropped the m5 instructions from the source code. I feel the students should not be worried about ROI in this assignment and the stats collected for this program should be for the entire matrix multiplication workload.

Reviewer: Hmm... but then they will see the initialization instructions as well. In fact, I would bet initialization is going to dominate. Why do you think this is better?

Author: In this assignment, I felt that the students should only consider the entire program. I agree that the initialization will dominate. We introduce ROI in assignment 2 and I omitted it to maintain the flow.

Reviewer: Ok, that sounds good to me.

Author: I thought about it for some time. I am examining the extent to which the initialization part dominates. I’m currently testing this and will revert soon.

Author: Okay, there are 15% -- 30% instructions in the initialization phase. We suggested using 224x224 matrices, where 14.4% of the instructions are in the init phase. I think we can go ahead with the current setup and introduce ROI in the next assignment.

Reviewer: Sounds great. Thanks for looking into it.

1. What metrics should you use to measure the performance of a computer system? Why?
2. Why is it not always possible to use the same metrics for performance to evaluate computer systems?
3. Define the Iron law of processor performance.

> 4. What does an Instruction Set Architecture (ISA) define?

Reviewer: Let's drop this. It's a good question, but it's covered in the quizzes

Author: Sure. I wanted to put his question to refresh the students' memory on the Iron Law as this assignment is based on the same.

Reviewer: Keep question 3, drop question 4 :)

Author: done.

In your report, answer the same questions after simulation supported with data. A complete set of simualtion data for this step should include **6 configurations** (2 options for CPU model * 3 options for memory model).

### Step III: Using different compiler optimizations

In this step, you'll be using different compiler optimizations to run the same
matrix multiplication program. Compiler optimization flags are options that can
be used to improve the *performance* of the program at the expense of

> compilation time and the ability to debug the program. The default version of

Reviewer: "at the expense of compilation time" is not a true statement. They are just optimizations that change the code. I agree that optimization can make debugging harder, but it's not *always* the case.

Author: Fixed it.

> the matrix multiply program is compiled with the flag `-O2`:

Reviewer: Please use one sentence per line instead of hard wrapping.

Author: okay.

```sh
g++ -o mm mm.cpp -static -O2
```

> We have compiled binaries with flags `-O0` and `-O3`. The former reduces the

Reviewer: `-O0` simply does *no* optimizations. It doesn't "optimize" the compilation time. `-O3` applies most of the optimizations that gcc (or llvm/clang) supports (still not *all* of them, though).

Author: fixed it.

compilation time and makes debugging produce expected results. The latter
optimizes the code to the maximum possible limit. This *usually* means that

> there are less number of instructions in the more optimized version of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
there are fewer instructions in the more optimized version of the
```

program. Let's look at the following computation: $z = \alpha x + y$.
This operation first multiplies $\alpha$ and $x$, and then adds $y$ to the
result. Assume that x, y and z are all float. In modern processors,

> these two steps are usually combined to do a `multiply and accumulate`
> operation in a single step. If the compiler detects such computations, it'll

Reviewer: ```suggestion
these two steps are usually combined in a single `multiply and accumulate`
operation. If the compiler detects such computations, it'll
```

(Note: this is why one sentence per line is important. See how this one small change I made causes cascading changes if you use hard wrapping? It makes reviewing quite difficult.)

Author: i'll fix it. by the way, are we following the 79-character limit per line for this repo?

Reviewer: No, and we *never* follow that for markdown files.

Author: okay. i'll update the assignment's readme as well.

> try to optimize this from two `ld` and one `st` to a MAC operation like

Reviewer: Define "MAC"

Author: done.

`fmadd.d` instruction.

> When we look at the assembly, it generates an `fmadd.d rd, rs1, rs2, rs3`.

Reviewer: It could be useful to link to a saved example on [godbolt](https://godbolt.org/)

Author: I'll do it once i am done with assignment 3. i need to spend some time with getting the correct results.

Use the `HW1TimingSimpleCPU` and `HW1DDR3_1600_8x8` for this step.

Before running any simulations try to answer this question, which has 4 parts:

1. Which program do you think will perform better? What part of the Iron Law
are you optimizing in this step? Do you think if you use CSIC ISA, the results

> will further improve? Why?

Reviewer: Split these parts out. It will be easier to grade. Either do 1a, 1b, 1c, and 1d, or 1, 2, 3, 4

Author: done.

In your report, answer the same questions after simulation supported with data.
A complete set of simualtion data for this step should include

> **2 configurations** (1 for -O0 and 1 for -O3)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**two configurations** (one for -O0 and one for -O3)
```

Spell out numbers <10.

Author: done.
